# MARTA - Minor of RTA package

Welcome to MARTA. This package contains the core functions of the RiboMARTA analysis, 
minor the cool interactive features.

## Installation

I would advise you to create a conda environment, just to keep everything contained.

```
conda env create --name marta_env python=3.12
```

You can tell install the package using

```
pip install git+https://github.com/Gionmattia/MARTA.git
```

## Usage

1) You can extract the coverage (raw counts per nucleotide position) for a specific transcript, as a.csv table.
2) You can run the RTA analysis using the transcript coordinates over the table from above.

### **extract-coverage** 

You need four arguments to run this:

- Path to a folder full of genomic BigWigs.
- Path to the .gtf file (same version as the one used to generate BigWigs).
- An Ensembl Transcript ID.
- An output path.

```
extract-coverage --bigwigs <path_bigwigs> --gtf <path_gtf> --txid <ENST00000602674> --output <path_output>
```

### **rta-analysis**

You need several arguments for this:

- Path to input table (generated by _extract_coverage_)
- Path to configuration file
- Path to output

The configuration file is a file where all the ranges and parameters for the analysis are specified.
You can find an example at https://github.com/Gionmattia/MARTA/blob/master/src/MARTA/config/default_config.yml

You can create a copy with your own parameters, or give them as flags in the CLI. If none are given, then defaults
are used (and THAT IS NOT GOOD, IT'S YOUR ANALYSIS!!)

Flags:

"--baseline"/ "-b" -> "Baseline region transcript coordinates (eg. '0,150')"

"--target"/"-t" -> "Target region transcript coordinates (eg. '150,300')"

"--noise"/ "-n" -> "Noise control region transcript coordinates (eg. '300,450')"

"--permutations"/ "-N" -> "Number of iterations (10000 in default_config.yml)"

"--remove", "-r" ->  "Nucleotides to remove from regions edges to exclude start/stop peaks 
(0 in default_config.yml, assumes user coordinates already accounted for)"

"--pvalthreshold"/ "-p" -> "Significance threshold for the p-value/padj (default: 0.05)"

"--seed"/ "-s" -> "Seed for permutations (None in default_config.yml)"

"--jobs"/ "-j" -> "Number of parallel jobs allowed (3 in default_config.yml)"